and so for this week's
talk i've chosen the title once around
the fireworks galaxy
and this is a marvelous picture of the
fireworks galaxy
on the left here and i love this image
because of the colors
because you've got that yellowy orange
almost brown tinge to the center the
nucleus of this lovely spiral galaxy
and then the spiral arms which are a
mixture of blue
and red pink colors
stretching out again with the brown
streaks of dirty dusty material
going across them so
this is a galaxy that's um once was
considered to be
part of the local group of galaxies that
the milky way
and andromeda form but we now know that
it's about
20 million light years away so it's
probably
really the number of the uh next little
group
further over rather than being a part of
our
little group that consists of us
andromeda triangulum
and a bunch of small dwarf galaxies
i love this stunning image of it here
you can see a number of very interesting
features we're going to look at this one
here
this rather strange bright blue region
down at the
bottom right on this image in a minute
but uh this is where it is
if you want to go look for it it's on
the border between
uh the northern tip of uh cygnus and
uh up there into the uh constellation of
um
cepheus the king so right on the
boundary between the two
and as i say 20 million light years from
us
it's about 40 000 light years in
diameter
and that's smaller than the milky way we
have
a diameter about 100 000 light years
and so rather a small galaxy
and about half the number of stars in
total
compared to the milky way but the
surprising thing about it
and the thing that gives it its name
of the fireworks galaxy is that there
have been 10
supernovae in the last 100 years
detected in this galaxy and
compared to the milky way which only
produced
one that's quite amazing when you
consider
that there's only half the number of
stars so that the rate of supernova
explosions is 20 times and
we call it a starburst galaxy for that
reason
and it gets its individual name of the
fireworks galaxy
because it's one of the most spectacular
from the point of view of
new supernovae and it seems to have been
doing this for a while
because if we bring on an image
overlaying with data from the
chandra x-ray uh satellite
then we see the green and blue regions
of x-ray emissions there's a couple of
very bright blue regions up here
greenish colored one of a different
energy here
here there and over here some more
tinges of green
so these are old uh
supernova shock waves that have expanded
outwards
and are still glowing and giving off
x-rays
probably contain quite a lot of
radioactive elements that are still in
the active stage
of decay now a couple of
rather strange features that you can
find in the fireworks galaxy
the first one is this one called the red
ellipse
up at the northern side of one of the
spiral arms here
this is a small version of the image
here showing the red ellipse
and then we've zoomed right in so on the
limits it's a little bit blurry and over
amplified in this image but you get the
idea
and what we think is going on here is a
very large
open cluster of massive stars has been
forming
and some of those massive stars have
been exploding as supernovae
and the shock waves are responsible for
those red rings that we see
says probably at least three different
rings
maybe four that you can see in that
image
from multiple different supernovae in
this
very young and active star cluster with
lots of very big powerful stars in it
now that strange blue ring that i
pointed out in the first image is called
hodges complex
and this is a beginnings of a bit of a
clue as to what's going on
here is hodges complex in normal
visible light and then we've got a
couple of zoomed in false color images
showing the structure deep within it
with these again with these rings
and loops of material and so this
was again once thought to be another of
these uh
giant star clusters forming
many many massive stars that were living
their short but violent lives and
exploding
as supernovae and pushing all the gas
into those
ring formations and glowing so brightly
in blue
because of the surviving hot blue young
stars
but a further possibility is that
actually
it's the nucleus of a recently swallowed
and
cannibalized dwarf galaxy that has
collided with the fireworks galaxy
and is mostly been eaten but the tightly
packed stars around the nucleus
are still visible as hodges complex and
that might be a clue as to why
all of this activity is going on it
might be something to do with
this recent merger with a smaller
neighboring galaxy
now if we look at um some of these
supernovae we're not going to go through
all of them but here's the list of
the uh 10 supernovae from the fireworks
galaxy
in the last hundred years they all get
names
sn for supernova and then the year
followed by a letter
or a sequence of letters and you can see
we had 1917 a
1939 c and so on single letters
once we get up to 2020 we're now
discovering
so many supernovae in a year as a result
of a lot of supernova surveys
that they've gone past zed around the
alphabet again in lowercase letters
and then done that 26 times and then 26
more times and got to
uh lowercase h so terrific number
and so you can see that uh
supernova 2004 et here
and one of the most recent 2017 needed
three letters
to uh catalogue it so we're discovering
so many more these days
but that's not why the fireworks galaxy
has got so many in it it just naturally
is very very active it's not an artifact
of discovery so just have a look at a
couple of the examples
that we know about so 2004 et
uh blew up on 27th of september
2004 and got up to a magnitude
of 15.2 which is way too
faint to be seen with the naked eye or
anything but
observable with an amateur telescope
and by looking back at
images of the galaxy prior to the update
they were able to track down the
progenitor star
that led up to the supernova and it
turned out to be a 15
solar mass red supergiant
so obviously the star had been through
its evolutionary process
uh used all its hydrogen in the core
swelled up into a giant
uh gone through further stages and
eventually
reached the point where it could no
longer continue nuclear fusion
because it was now trying to build the
heavier elements up to and including
iron in the core
and that causes the typical core
collapse
and a supernova explosion that we're all
familiar with
but in this particular case it had a
companion star
and the companion was a blue supergiant
just prior to the supernova explosion
and that's quite interesting because it
means the scenario
is a bit like the graphic on the left
hand side here
in the early stages of the life of these
pair of stars
they would have been a larger star
that was a blue main sequence giant star
and a fairly modest star of um
main sequence round about the same mass
as the sun maybe even a little bit less
to begin with but once the
uh more massive star went through its
evolutionary cycle
very quickly as massive stars do and
reached the red supergiant stage
it started to lose mass
because the outer layers have swelled up
so much that they
cross over into the gravitational
region controlled by the nearby partners
star
they've crossed the uh lagrange point
here
and go from one roche lobe as it's
called which is the
region of influence where this star is
dominant
into the rush lobe of the companion
and that feeds the smaller star and so
it would evolve
and grow into a higher temperature more
massive star so
from orange up to yellow
or even up to white and then gradually
as
more and more mass is lost by the outer
layers
of the giant star that's losing mass
um and the mass transfer eventually
slows down
but it usually in this case has fed
the other star up to being a blue giant
in its own right
um in a fairly youthful condition
because it's being fed lots of extra
hydrogen then of course the next step
was for the
red star to run out of fuel and blow up
and being so close together that may
partially disrupt the blue star
but their stars are pretty tough and so
the shock wave may have
stripped some material off it again and
it may well still be there
so an interesting example but it started
with
one of these 15 solar mass monster stars
and the most recent one 2017
eaw was a little brighter magnitude
12.8 when it exploded in may of 2017
but again we were able to track back
using photographs and find
the parent star and this was also a 15
solar mass
red supergiant and that's not a
coincidence
that's because the lifetime of a star
depends on its mass
and there was a an event
that triggered off a lot of star
formation
and it was triggered off a period of
time ago
that corresponds to the age of
a 15 solar mass star
reaching its supernova point
so that might be around about
something like uh 10 to 15 million
years and
most of these stars were formed at about
the same time
caused perhaps by the merger with that
small dwarf galaxy triggering off a
burst of star formation
and so what we're seeing is that the
time is now
up for all the stars that were born then
that have 15 solar masses the more
massive ones
will have blown up sometime a little
earlier
and as time goes on it'll work its way
down the mass range
showing a surge in slightly smaller
supernovae
so very interesting to be able to figure
out the date because
all of these supernovae that are going
off in the last 100 years
are roughly these 15 solar mass red
supergiants
because they're all in sync in their
life cycle
now if we look at other galaxies that
are also classified as starbursts
this is one of the favorite ones that we
have for our
wednesday night observing sessions very
well placed at the moment
nice and high up in ursa major
messier's object number 82 the cigar
galaxy
and in a small telescope you see a long
thin
streak of light with maybe a strange
tear or blot across the center
but in this hubble space telescope image
here
which you can see a little bit into the
infrared we can see
the main part of the galaxy looking very
blue
with some dirty dust lanes along it and
we're looking at
a spiral galaxy side on here the nucleus
is a little bit obscured
by the spiral arms but does give a
slightly yellow tinge
through having mostly older stars and
the
spiral arms are blue because they've got
lots of young
blue stars that were recently formed and
then you've got all this
amazing structure where material is
spewing out from the center
and that is probably where the black
hole
in the center the supermassive black
hole has been
feeding on in falling material
and black holes are very messy eaters
they spew a lot of it out
along their magnetic spin axis which may
well not be aligned to the
rotation axis of the galaxy and so it
gives you a
a cone shape of ejecta above and below
the galaxy like this
forming these amazing tendrils and
bubble structures
but the body of the galaxy is so blue
and that means an awful lot of
young stars were formed and again at
about 10 times the normal rate
and if it carries on like that it's
going to use up all of the spare gas
and then the star formation will come to
a halt
it's about 12 million light years from
us
and here's a composite image showing
that that
ejector and gas goes even further out
away from the nucleus there
that's been put together using
millimeter wave
astronomy from the uh alma the atacama
large millimeter array down there in the
desert in chile
and it shows that that cooler gas
stretches much further out
and we know what caused it for the cigar
galaxy
because we can see the culprit it's
bodes galaxy messier 81 which is very
nearby
in all just not only on the sky but in
three dimensions it's also
about 12 million light years from us and
about 6 million years ago
the two of them had a very near miss
in space and the larger gravity of
bodes galaxy tore into
the structure of uh the cigar galaxy
twisted the spiral arms and created
enormous disturbance
and it's that activity that's led to all
of the starbursts
that's been going on since in the cigar
galaxy
so there's another clue that merges and
near collisions of galaxies are
responsible
but if you want final proof here's the
antenna galaxies
again a lot of starburst activity going
on here
and these have been caught mid merger
and uh you can see the two bodies of the
galaxies
bumping into each other and the vast
amount of
new pink star-forming clouds that have
been created
where the gas clouds belonging to the
two galaxies
have collided with each other that
increases the density it pushes the
material together
and that push is just enough to trigger
off
vast amounts of new star formation
we can bring in the composite image
taken with alma
again showing the heating of an awful
lot of the gas clouds
in this interesting spiral arrangement
around here showing that the path taken
as the two galaxies were orbiting around
each other
and that's responsible again for all of
this
star forming in this loop around the uh
upper galaxy but if we pull back
we can see in a wider context here
the two bodies of the main galaxies
merging together
and the enormous long tidal tales
of stars that have been ejected
from these galaxies out across space
this is part of the dynamics of what
happens when galaxies merge together
they uh throw off enormous tidal tales
uh all to do with the conservation of
angular momentum as the
galaxies start to spin faster around
each other
so that's the antenna galaxies and again
the starburst
nature of it is revealed to be the
result of this merger
this is the ic10 it's uh
the nearest starburst galaxy to the
milky way
and in fact it is a member of the local
group it's just
2.2 million light years away from us
so the same distance as the andromeda
galaxy
but in a different direction in space
and we know the distance because we've
detected
the good old yellow supergiant cepheid
variables
in there and been able to use the
cepheid
power law to figure out the distance
it contains a lot of very very powerful
stars
wolf reyette stars that would all be be
classed as w
class stars in the past um we you now
could just
call the wolf rayet the w was standing
for wolf royette anyway
um and they're hotter even than the o
class stars
that are the hottest of the normal main
sequence stars
and these uh w class stars who
a very different look to them they have
only helium in their spectrum almost no
hydrogen
and this is because they have developed
such
energetic fusion in their cores due to
their high mass
that the outer layers of hydrogen
that would normally be burning as the
surface layers of all lesser stars
have been completely blown away into
space revealing the inner
helium shell that
would normally lie underneath a layer of
hydrogen
so that's ic10 and that's coming our way
and it will eventually merge with the
rest of the galaxies of our local group
it's approaching at 350 kilometers per
second
which is twice as fast as the andromeda
galaxy
and so it's going to get here first as
well
now this is the large binocular
telescope in arizona well placed up a
mountain
with two of the largest astronomical
mirrors 8.4
the world's biggest pair of binoculars
and it was part of a search
of 27 such starburst galaxies
that we know about lasting four years
looking to catch supernovae in action
it's a good place to search in these
starburst galaxies because you generally
don't have to wait very long
and indeed they caught a very
interesting event
and this goes by the designation
n6946 bh1
and the event occurred in the
uh spring of 2009.
suddenly from march onwards the
brightness
of this particular object
in the fireworks galaxy i would point
out
um ngc 6946 is the fireworks galaxy
and this particular object brightened up
to become as bright as a million times
the output of our sun
and then faded away again and by
six years later in 2015 it was no longer
visible to
optical telescopes even the best ones in
the world
you can see in the images at the top
here it brightening and
then fading away again the
images are black and white the top one
is
v band which means blue really blue and
ultraviolet light
and the r band is the long wavelength
red and infrared light
so you can see the slight differences in
the way that it brightened and faded in
the two bands
now this is interesting because the key
fact here is it became as bright as a
million suns
and that's a lot but it's not
as much as a typical supernova
we have two typical types of
supernova that we always talk about we
have the type
1a supernova which is
where you have an exploding white dwarf
and the white dwarf feeds
off its large neighbor when the large
neighbor swells up to be a
a red giant as shown here the white
dwarf
from the earlier binary companion
feeds off it until it reaches the
chandrasekhar limit of 1.44
solar masses which point it just can't
take any more mass
and explodes in a runaway thermonuclear
explosion
that completely destroys the star and
these type 1a
supernovae are the brightest type of
supernova
they're 10 billion times the
brightness of our sun at their peak
output
so our event that was discovered
in 2009 was only one million
suns and these things are 10 billion
so that's 10 000 times more powerful
what about the type 2 supernovae these
are giant stars
that run out of fuel as we were talking
about earlier
in the classic supernovae of the 15
solar mass stars that are blowing up
in the fireworks galaxy about now
they reach the point where their core
contains
iron and they can't go any further and
explode
as a type 2 core collapse supernova
but these surprisingly are
10 times less bright than the
type 1a detonation of a white dwarf
even though it's a bigger star that's
exploding actually the explosion is very
inefficient
it throws a lot of material around but
it doesn't convert
very much of the mass into energy
whereas the white dwarf completely
vanishes
and all of its mass is turned into
energy so
it's 10 times as powerful
but even these less bright type 2s are
still a thousand times more powerful
than the event
that was observed by the large binocular
telescope
only one million suns for that one a
thousandth is
as bright so what's going on
bit of a mystery well here is a couple
of images from the hubble space
telescope
and it's just kind of before and after
so
in 2007 two years before the detonation
there's a large star there encircled
with the
blue ring so you can see it and then in
afterwards you can barely see anything
at all just a faint
red glow right in the center of the
circle there
and so putting this evidence together
what we figured out is that the original
star
was in fact a real powerhouse
an o type blue giant 25 solar masses
so considerably larger than the other
ones we were looking at
it would have been when it was still
burning a hundred thousand
times as bright as our sun
and burning through its fuel even though
it's got 25 times
more fuel it's burning it a hundred
thousand times
faster and so the lifetime of these
things is under 10 million years
and this one exploded and we saw it
in 2009
it would have been right up in this top
left-hand corner of the good old hertz
sprung russell diagram
um so it's uh would have been born on
the
main sequence here as an o type 25
solar mass main sequence star and had a
very short life
it might have nipped across over here to
become a blue supergiant
or a yellow supergiant or even a
red hyper giant star as we would call it
before blowing up but it wouldn't have
spent very long doing that
because its total life is very short
unlike the sun here which
is going to cruise along much more
economically
for another 000 million years it's only
halfway through its fuel
and these guys down here the little tiny
stars they're gonna live
essentially uh many many times longer
than the current age of the universe
even
at least these ones here live maybe a
hundred billion years
and the little tiny red ones a trillion
years or more
now we've traced the fading star also
with the spitzer telescope in the
infrared
to see what we can see there and we can
see
a glow there still detectable um
even in 2015 that's about 5 000 times as
bright
as the sun so it's faded a lot from the
million
solar outputs when it blew up down to
just five
thousand and it's glowing faintly in the
infrared
so we take the light curves that we've
got from those observations
we haven't got very many but we can sort
of construct a light
curve in the visible light it
grew brighter stayed around for a few
years
and then faded and then
exploded with an enormous bang there
and then faded away and the infrared
gradually
rose to a peak and then more slowly
faded away
now this 25 solar mass giant star
would have gone through a number of
cycles burning hydrogen to helium
then helium to carbon carbon to oxygen
then on to neon and then to elements
like magnesium and silicon
and then finally silicon burning to iron
and each of those stages releases some
energy but it's a law of diminishing
returns
most of the energy budget comes from the
hydrogen stage
burning to form helium and the last
stage silicon
burning to iron we normally tell people
only lasts a matter of um
six months to to a year and that's
what's happening here in this case
that the the uh lull
to the left of the graph here was the
star in a state where it was forming
in a silicon in the middle of the core
and then it brightened when the amount
of silicon in there reached a
pressure and density to ignite the
burning of silicon
to give iron by uh
in the last gasp of nuclear fusion so it
started
uh burning the silicon so it got
brighter and it lasted for about a year
burning silicon before uh it then
started having to dump the ash
from that burning process the iron into
the core
and again the inert core started to
build
in in size and mass and so the overall
efficiency and power output of the star
declined again down to here
until it reached the point uh just
six months later where the iron core
couldn't support its own weight anymore
and it collapsed down and that leads to
the explosion
so you can see that cycling in the uh
the light curve
so what actually happened what was this
peak was it a proper supernova
well what we think happened with such a
large
star is that a black hole formed
directly stars in the range
sort of zero to ten and a half solar
masses
uh don't undergo this core collapse they
don't manage to get to the iron forming
stage
and they uh end up as white dwarfs
10.5 solar masses to 18 solar masses
they do indeed form an iron core and
blow up as a type 2 supernova
and form a neutron star in the center as
the
core collapses the implosion crushes the
material
and makes all the protons and electrons
join up as neutrons
and you get a ball of neutrons in the
center the
new neutron star and that is very very
rigid and solid and dense and the rest
of the in-falling material
tries to hit it can't make it penetrated
at all
and bounces off and the shock wave tears
the
sharp the rest of the star apart and
scatters the
remnants to the four winds in space and
so that's that's what a type 2 supernova
looks like
but this star at 25 solar masses
would have attempted to form a neutron
star but
the neutron star would have been more
than
the allowed maximum mass for
such an object so called tolman
oppenheimer volkov limits
at around three solar masses of
neutron star and that then
cannot support its own weight and what
we think happens here is
it collapsed on downwards straight away
forming a black hole inside the star
and the black hole then proceeds to eat
the inner
side of the star from the inside out as
the material
unsupported falls in it the black hole
just grows and grows and eats it
and so there is no shock wave no
detonation
and the star destroys itself
but not by exploding outwards
in a very very bright event indeed and
that's why it was only
a million solo ass event
a solar brightness event uh compared to
the billions for a
type 2 supernova and so we're gonna have
to rewrite this slide a little bit
this is the normal picture we give of uh
the evolution of stars under that ten
and a half solar mass limit
they go through the main sequence
form a small red giant that puffs off
its outer layers as a planetary nebula
and then it leaves behind the white
dwarf
over ten and a half solar masses you get
a larger
star you get a red supergiant and then
a supernova explosion which if it's
18 solar masses or less gives you a
neutron star
and we used to say over that the
supernova gave you a black hole
and sometimes if if material fell back
onto the
neutron star that would then undergo
a conversion to a black hole via this
other wiggly line
but i think really the the diagram
should go from the red supergiant
directly to the black hole via a
different
sort of nova event that we don't really
have a name for
and so we're going to have to rewrite
the textbooks as a result of
this particular discovery catching such
a rare and massive event
in the act being able to see it both
before and after
and so that's why i think studying these
starburst
galaxies like the fireworks galaxy is uh
so important because it's building our
understanding
of just how these uh life cycle of stars
really does work and we're finding new
things all the time